Welcome to Catholic Stuff You Should Know, a J10 initiative. All right, Deuter. Podcast time. Podcast time. Am I starting? You may begin. all right is it going it is going should we start with that sure hey welcome to the podcast everybody this is uh deacon john and joe and joe yeah and it's a beautiful thursday morning up here in the treehouse studio as we call it we were just talking about only on the podcast we call that but we're uh just uh talking about mumford and sons and uh the band the irish sensation yeah i'm loving mumford and sons man john Where did you hear about them? From your sister? I was ordained a month ago, and it was a gift for my ordination from Seska. Seska, whose name is short for Francesca. But she gave it to me, and I thought, man, I am totally in. I got this new band. Nobody knows about it. The next day, I'm sitting in Starbucks, and what do they play? Mumford Sons. You know who also likes them a lot is Deacon John Neal. Really? Yeah. You've got to be careful, though, with that Irish melancholic music, because if you're in a... State of desolation, it will totally make you way more desolate because Irish they're kind of just all Irish music is just a little depressed even when it's happy. It's true. So they have this line where they say in how does it go? In our bodies we will live. In our bodies we will die. Where you invest your love, you invest your life. So there you go. That's a kind of lame segue to what we're going to talk about today. Okay. which is evolution and creation. I don't think that completely follows. Yeah, kind of. Because the word body has something to do with evolution. The topic today, Joe, is a massive one, and it's an exciting one. And people are going to see this on the iTunes or on the website or whatever, and they're going to say, ooh. These guys are cool. These guys are cool. They're really in. How relevant. But this is really not. This is just like a sliver of it because we don't have the time. As we talk about every week, Sister Esther's class starts here in a few minutes. Sunday, you will be free from the constraints of Sister Mary's oppression. Yeah, exactly. So we're going to table anything that has to do with intelligent design slash purpose about Big Bang. We're not dealing with that today. What we're dealing with is evolution as a theory and Genesis chapter one. Okay? So we've just narrowed our scope. Are you listening to me? I am listening. You're not. You're prepping for your podcast. I'm trying to do something else, but I am listening. Okay. Well, I want you to repeat after me. Evolution. Evolution. Is the change in the inherited traits of a population of organisms through successive generations. If you're listening, just tell me what I just said. Evolution is popular organism. There you go. Okay. Evolution essentially is change in inherent. traits in an organism that happens over successive generations. So over time, there's genetic mutation, as they call it, or genetic changes. So there's development in organisms. There's development in, and this is the theory that Darwin proposed in the mid-19th century. Which, here's an interesting line. Now, this is, I'm just going to read this. This is from a very, very valuable source, but I think it gives us an understanding of what the culture thinks in terms of evolution is against creation. And these two are opposed against each other. This is from a really profound source known as Wikipedia. But this is a guy who, and this, he just, he sums it up well. In the 19th century, particularly after the publication of On the Origin of Species in 1859, the idea that life has evolved. was an active source of academic debate, okay, with philosophical implications. Nowadays, the fact that organisms evolve is uncontested in scientific literature. So this is uncontested in scientific literature. And, however, evolution remains only contested by some theists, okay? These religious people have their, what they call, creation myths. And they just are denying what's scientifically a fact. This is polarization. Essentially what they're saying. Okay, not that simple. Thank you for, that's kind of our cultural place. That's where things are, and that's where people kind of think. And a lot of times Catholics are just embarrassed. They're just like, I don't want to talk about that issue. I don't want to talk about that. So the purpose of this podcast is to give you a little ammunition. There you go. It's not that simple, and it's actually really kind of beautiful. Because if Jesus Christ is the truth. and he reveals himself, it's not going to be contrary to scientific truths, natural truths. Supernatural truths will not contradict natural truths. But sometimes scientific developments will change the way that we interpret God's self-disclosure in the Bible, in revolution. Right. Does that make sense? Yeah, we talked about this last week. Exactly. We're doing the scientific theme. Let's jump into the text. Well, first off, one more word about evolution before we begin. There's two kinds of evolution. There's microevolution and macroevolution. Microevolution. Evolution means that there's genetic mutation, that there's change that happens within a species. Right. Macro evolution means that species are developing from species. I got you. So micro is like a person or, you know, an animal might develop like a different kind of fur, but macro would be like, you know, an elephant developed from a mouse. Exactly. Exactly. Yeah. Perfect. My example of Mike would have been Joe Doman grows a third arm and then everybody, all of Joe Doman's Or wings. Or wings. If you wanted to have something cooler. Very possible. Very possible. You have enough gifts, by the way. You don't need wings. But there's a huge difference there, and microevolution has been shown to be and has been verified as a scientific theory. Macroevolution, though, has more philosophical implications, and it's not proven. There's not the sense of there's not the certainty that we have. We haven't shown that this species comes from this species in a way that we've shown that there are certain developments and mutations that happen within a species. Are you talking When you talk about the philosophical implications, are you speaking more about humans evolving from... Other species, or are you talking more about just in general, any species involving other species? Any species involving any species. And really this question, the philosophical, what's the philosophical in this? The origin of life. Bam. That's the fundamental thing. What does the natural processes of evolution say about the origin of life? But it's a jump to say, to make a claim about the origin of life. And that's where we draw the line. Okay. We're not here, Catholic stuff you should know, we're not here to talk about evolution. We're not here to say, this is true. This is true. is true this is not true scientifically we don't know that we're not qualified for that what we are qualified to say is that evolution if whether it's just micro or macro let's say it's macro let's say it's like all out and science eventually kind of shows this much more clearly it's still consonant with genesis chapter one really let me show you let's do it man this is cool chapter one verse one in the beginning god created the heavens and the earth okay so in the beginning god created the earth First, this is a very important word, created. If you read closely Genesis chapter 1, there's only three times when the word created is actually said. Because we think creation story, God created this, God created this, blah, blah, blah, animals, blah, blah, blah. Nope. Only three times does he create. Really? In verse 1, in verse 21, and in verse 27. Now, this is what's interesting. You ready for this? The Hebrew word for create is very specific. It's perfect. Barach. Barach. Barach. And it's very specific. It means creation, ex nihilo, creation out of nothing. Okay? It's not like I create, you know, I got Play-Doh and I created a house out of Play-Doh. No, I fashioned it. And it uses the word fashion a lot of times, facere, in the Latin. And there's a different Hebrew word. Asha is the different one. But anyways, when it says created in Genesis chapter... ones it means created out of nothing now why three times yeah this is sweet the three times are this out of nothing genesis chapter 1 verse 1 god creates matter he creates anything right nothing existed before and he creates something so from out of nothing into something that's the first creation second creation verse 21 god created and he starts talking about the animals but specific it's the move from non-life to life the writer of genesis is created barack okay so create The implication that has is that when he uses the Barak, it's meaning he's not just making something from something that's pre-existing. He's not. He's intervening in a new way. Exactly. This is a specific... Moment of unique creation out of nothing. It's not him fashioning it. So you have Barak. He creates something out of nothing. Barak, he creates life out of non-life. And then lastly, Barak, verse 27, humanity. Really? Spiritual soul created, which is Catholic teaching. It is Catholic doctrine that man has a soul and that God created it uniquely, immediately, specifically. With every human soul, God creates the soul. Distinct. And obviously it's bound up. with its nature. But those are the three places that says Barak. It says creation. The other points, okay, so what about the stars? What about all this stuff? What about the animals? What about, okay, that's all fashion. God fashions this. So he creates, bam, and then he fashions and fashions and fashions for a couple more days and then, bam, creates life, fashions and fashions and then, bam, creates a soul. That is awesome. Now this is what's crazy. Crazy. Crazy. Crazy Mike Zizda and who's the other one? Oh, Elisha. Elisha. This is crazy. Guess what are called the three evolutionary jumps. Macro evolution cannot figure out the three jumps. Yeah. Scientifically, this is the mystery. This is the stunning mystery. They can't figure it out. Guess what they are. Science cannot show how did something come from nothing. Science cannot show how did life come from non-life. Science cannot show how does a human being have self-consciousness and free will and rationality, the faculties of a soul that come out of animals. Those are what are called the three evolutionary jumps. And people who speak. speak against um macroevolution say these are the problems they have not been they they cannot be shown scientifically to be proven and the scriptures have them all right in there that is awesome isn't that interesting that's really cool and it's interesting too because whoever uh wrote the Genesis 1, whether it was Moses or somebody else, I'm sure they didn't know about the Cambrian explosion and all the things that science couldn't explain. Exactly. But this is the Word of God. This is divine authorship. This is ancient, but it's so beautiful. And all we have to do is read it a little more closely. Now you can say to me, oh, okay, that's great, you got your little trick word with create and fashion. But all you theists, all you creationists, you hold strong to the seven-day creation theory. And evolution shows that this could have happened over thousands of years. Right? Right. Okay. Let's go back to the Hebrew. We know God creates the world in seven days. Yeah, how does that line up? The Hebrew word for day is Yom. Y-O-M. Yom Kippur. Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement. Do you know what Yom means? Day. You just said that. Exactly. But it means specifically, it can mean a 24-hour period, like a day as we understand it, or an extended period of time. The Hebrew word yom is much wider. So God creates the world in seven yoms, seven periods of time. If science shows us that that's clearly not a 24-hour period, which is what it's essentially pointing to, then we say absolutely. The Hebrew text, the Hebrew scriptures are saying. This is God creates the world in seven yoms. And he specifically intervenes three times to create something out of nothing. But he could have used evolutionary processes, by the way, to get us to where we're at. That's wild. So like the fashioning of God can be God directing and ordering the mutations and the genetic mutations. And whether micro or macro evolution, God can be fashioning, God can be at work, his order in the creative thing. Without anything, any supernatural intervention. Exactly. But the supernatural. to mention is the barak yeah the global creation life something out of nothing exactly that's really what i'm saying is like you know and it's not as much catholics but it's it's a lot of non-catholic christians who say no we got to hold strong to the seven-day creation theory we gotta we gotta trust the bible well to know the bible means to you got to know the hebrew you got to really dig deeper into this if you stay on a superficial level in the bible and you try and engage science you will not you will polarize it and you'll I'll just have to reject science. On the other side, if you just take science and you have an agenda and you're trying to destroy the Bible, you're never actually going to realize that you might actually have something to learn from this. It's a beautiful complementary between theology, between science, the truths of God in nature, the truths of God in the supernatural world. You're giving me the sign. It's time to stop talking. No, no, no. I didn't want to interrupt you. That's all. No, it's just really cool because we see the collision, I guess. of faith and reason in our culture again. You know, and we have these fundamentalist Christians and we have the scientific community not wanting to reconcile. But that's the beautiful thing about the thought of the Catholic Church is that there isn't always a faith. There's always a faith and a belief that faith and reason are reconcilable because they have the same source of truth, which is who is God, who is truth itself. You know, so there should be no fear. When the scientific community says, well, this is what science is saying. We should say, okay, well, if this can be reconciled with our faith, and we should fight and believe that it can be, be open to it. But if there's something that says, completely contradicts the faith, like that life just evolved out of nothing or something like that, and with no miraculous, or that miracles can't happen, then we can draw the line and say, not only is this not in line with our faith, that's not good science either. Because we have faith that science and faith... are reconcilable. Exactly. You're not doing science well if your beliefs are driving you, your ideologies are driving you to make claims to say God does not exist, God is not such and such creation. You're making philosophical and theological claims as a scientist. And the beautiful thing about being Catholic is that we hold both together, faith and reason. So is the Catholic. Who is that? Is somebody at Steubenville? I think it's Regis Martin. I never had him. Regis Martin. Both and is always the Catholic position. Faith. Protestants, they hold to faith, but they reject reason. Scientists, they hold to reason, but they reject faith. And you cannot come to the truths of God, both in nature and in supernature, unless you hold them together. That's all I've got to say. That's great stuff, man. Yeah, exciting. That's really interesting. I love it. Now, it's really cool. It's interesting how in science, in the history of science, this issue comes up again and again. We see it in Galileo, where there's some sort of rub between faith and science. And the... apparent contradiction is based on a misinterpretation of either scientific data or revelation, misinterpretation of what we have in, in revelation. So it's, we see that in Galileo. We see that in this, in this evolution debate, you know, so it's really cool stuff, man. Awesome. We've got some emails. Okay. This is actually what I was doing. I was just trying to make sure I had a good email to give. So I wasn't preparing for my own. Are you reading a book over there? I'm like, I'm sure what you're doing is very important. No, no, no. Science. All right. Speaking of science, we've got a science email here. Okay. This is from... A certain Brandon. Brandon. Brandon. He says, the title of the subject of this is Catholic Scientists, you say? This is in response to our appeal for Catholic Scientists. Right. He says, I happen to be one of those. Nice podcast. You mentioned how having a strong grasp of science deepens one's understanding of one's faith. I have seen images of the Trinity pop up all over the place in my work with science, which would be expected if God made creation to reveal himself in humanity. Anyway, neat stuff. More podcasts like this one would be awesome. Here you go, Brandon. There you go, Brandon. Got another one. Also, I like the hee-haw intro. Yeah. In your face, Dr. J. No, Brandon, actually, you know, Brandon has been a friend for many years, and his knowledge and love of physics in particular and astronomy is awesome. And he's really you've got to have people like that, Catholic men and women who really know science and love science, because they help. kind of reveal these things to us as well. That's awesome stuff. Yeah. Great job, man. Well, we'll see you guys next week. And any more thoughts, suggestions, insults, comments, whatever, we will take them catholicstuffpodcast at gmail.com. See you next week.